# Report on NBA Statistics

**Authors:**  Victoria Chang, Toni Idowu, Shravya Kanchanapally,
            Ana Ramirez Tovar, Sara Rozengarten

**Course:**   DATA 550


## Overview

The final report evaluates 3 elements:

(1) Does the position you play influence the number of points you score in the
    game per 36 minutes?
    
(2) Does age influence the amount of time you spend on the court per 36 minutes?

(3) Is there a correlation between the number of games played and the number of
    defensive rebounds performed per 36 minutes? 

The report includes descriptive statistics on points scored by position, an
ANOVA comparing points by position, a linear regression on minutes played vs.
age, and a linear regression on number of games played vs. number of defensive
rebounds performed. 

The report also includes a boxplot that shows the distribution of points
scored per 36 minute by player position. The first scatterplot shows player age
vs. minutes played per 36 minutes. The second scatterplot shows number of games
played vs. defensive rebounds per 36 minutes for players.


------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Data Description
Raw data consists of ranking of top NBA players based on per 36-minute
performance statistics (as of October 30, 2025). The data was sourced from
www.basketball-reference.com

## Project Structure

├── code/  
├── data_raw/  
├── data_clean/  
├── output/  
├── report.Rmd  
├── data550-midterm.Rproj  
├── README.md  
├── Makefile  
├── config.yml  
└── .gitignore  


## Initial code description

`code/Ana_clean_data.R`

  - loads raw data `.csv` from `data_raw/` folder
  - cleans data (e.g., removes duplicates) for players rank 1 to 281
  - saves cleaned data for players rank 1-281 as `ana_clean.csv` file in
    `data_clean/` folder

`code/Toni_clean_data.R`

  - loads raw data `.csv` from `data_raw/` folder
  - cleans data (e.g., removes duplicates) for players rank 282 to 562
  - saves cleaned data for players rank 282-562 as `toni_clean.csv` file in
    `data_clean/` folder

`code/00_joined_clean_data.R`

  - loads `ana_clean.csv` and `toni_clean.csv` from `data_clean/` folder
  - combines `ana_clean.csv` and `toni_clean.csv` into one `nba_combined.csv`
    dataset in the `data_clean/` folder

`code/01_analysis.R`

  - loads clean data `nba_combined.csv` from the `data_clean/` folder
  - runs ANOVA on points per 36 minutes by player position and saves 
    output as `position_pts_anova_results.rds` in `output/` folder
  - runs descriptive statistics of points per 36 minutes by player position
    and saves output as `position_pts_summary.rds` in `output/` folder
  - runs linear regression on minutes played and age and saves output as 
    `age_mins_regression_results.rds` in `output/` folder
  - runs linear regression of defensive rebounds on games played and saves
    output as `games_dreb_regression_results.rds` in `output/` folder
    
`code/Shravya_graphs.R`

  - loads clean data `nba_combined.csv` from the `data_clean/` folder
  - creates boxplot of points scored per game per 36 minutes per position and 
    saves output as `box_plot_1.png` in `output/` folder
  - creates scatterplot of age vs. minutes played per 36 minutes and saves
    output as `scatter_plot_2.png` in `output/` folder
  - creates scatterplot of games vs. defensive rebounds per 36 minutes and
    saves output as `scatter_plot_3.png` in `output/` folder

`code/03_render_report.R`

  - renders `report.Rmd`

`report.Rmd`

  - reads output generated by `code/01_analysis.R` and `Shravya_graphs.R` which
    include `age_mins_regression_results.rds`,
    `games_dreb_regression_results.rds`,
    `position_pts_anova_results.rds`,
    `position_pts_summary.rds`, `box_plot_1.png`,
    `scatter_plot_2.png`, and `scatter_plot_3.png` in the `output/` folder
  - knits `report.html` which compares points scored by position, relationship
    between age and time spent playing, and relationship between number of
    games played and rate of defensive rebounds.

`Makefile`

  - contains rules for building the report
  - `make all` will generate the final report
  - `make output/games_dreb_regression_results.rds` will generate four
    `.rds` files of descriptive statistics, regression, and ANOVA results in
    the `/output` folder needed to compile the report
  - `make output/scatter_plot_3.png` will generate 3 `.png` files of a boxplot
    and 2 scatter plots in the `output` folder 
  - `make clean` will remove all `output` and the `report.html`
  - `make install` uses the `renv` package to restore the R package environment
    to that of lockfile

`config.yml`

  - contains different configurations for report customization
  - configuration options:
    - `default`: original colors of graphs
    - `newcolors`: new, more muted colors of graphs

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Setting Up

1. Clone the repository:
`git clone <repo-url>`

2. Navigate to project directory:
`cd <repo-name>`

3. Install required R packages:
`make install` 
  - uses renv package to use project-specific package versions

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Cleaning Output for Testing

`make clean`
  - cleans output and report .html files to "reset" clean folders for
    more testing

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Creating the Report

### Customizing the Report
In your terminal, execute command `export WHICH_CONFIG="name of config"` where
you replace "name of config" with the name of the configuration in the
`config.yml` you would like to run based on your graph colors of interest.
Configurations we have included decide on graph color--see below.

Configuration options include:

  - `default`: original colors of graphs
  - `newcolors`: new, more muted colors of graphs

### Compiling the Report

Set the configuration before running `make report_config_${WHICH_CONFIG}.html`.

Run `make report_config_${WHICH_CONFIG}.html` command in Terminal to create
outputs needed for report and to compile the final report.

The Makefile automatically runs all scripts in the correct order; manual
execution is not required.

### Example

`export WHICH_CONFIG=newcolors`

`make report_config_${WHICH_CONFIG}.html`